# GALL_WASP_ENDOPHYTES_PROJECT
This repository contains the working data and code that was used in the paper "Fungal Endophyte Communities in Galled Oak Leaves: Stability in Leaves, Divergence in Galls" by Christopher Bivins and Carolin Frank

This project involved the use of fungal ITS metabarcoding using an Illumina MiSeq 250 Paired-End sequencing approach to determine how fungal endophyte communities are impacted by Cynipid gall wasps in Quercus douglasii (blue oak) leaves. We sampled ungalled leaves, leaves galled by Feron gigas, Feron gigas galls, leaves galled by Cynips quercusechinus, and Cynips quercusechinus galls. 

"Working data" refers to data that has already been processed for analysis. Processing included quality filtering and trimming using a custom Trimmomatic (0,39) perl script that prepares paired-end fastq files for further processing with AMPtk. The custom Trimmomatic script can be found in the Code folder on this repository, and is titled "make_Trimmomatic_forAMPtk.pl". Briefly, the script is set trim all 5’ and 3’ bases with quality scores less than 20, followed by 3’ trimming with a 4:20 sliding window quality threshold, and a final minimum sequence retention length of 100 bp. Reads failing to meet these quality standards were discarded entirely. After trimming, paired-end reads were joined for further processing with AMPtk. With AMPtk, reads were further processed by demultiplexing, clustering into OTUs, filtering low abundance OTUs and chimeras, and assigning taxonomy with the UNITE-ITS database. The final processed data product was a BIOM file that can be imported into R and loaded as a phyloseq object. The BIOM file is in the Workding_Data folder, titled "taxonomyITS.biom". The data was then analyzed in R. All code for R-based analysis can be found in the Code folder, in the file titled "Gall_Project_NEATEST.Rmd". In R, functional traits were assigned to OTUs using the FungalTraits database. The raw OTU table was transformed into a relative abundance OTU table and exported (OTU_relative_abundance_table.csv) along with the sample_table (Gall_project_metadata.csv) and fungal trait data table (guild_table.csv). All of these tables are located in the "Working_Data" folder. Plots were generated using these tables, and code for plot reproduction can be found in the Code folder. 

Raw read data, in the form of fastq files, has been accessioned to GenBank and can be found under the following BioProject ID: PRJNA1212509

For any questions or comments, please contact the corresponding author, Christopher Bivins, at cbivins@ucmerced.edu


